Document the effects of upstream deletion (#3818)
Azure/azure-service-operator: docs/hugo/content/design/ADR-2024-02-Upstream-Deletion/_index.md

---
title: 2024-02 Upstream Deletion
---

What do we do if/when a resource supported by ASO v2 is deleted upstream - removed from the Azure OpenAPI repository? 

## Context

In July 2022, we encountered a problem when the preview versions of the `Microsoft.Auithorization` service were deleted from the [azure-resource-manager-schemas](https://github.com/Azure/azure-resource-manager-schemas) repository that ASO consumed at the time. This orphaned the `RoleAssignment` resource in ASO, which would have been a breaking change for our users.

Since that time, ASO has migrated to depend soley on the [azure-rest-api-specs](https://github.com/Azure/azure-rest-api-specs) repo (see [PR#2323](https://github.com/Azure/azure-service-operator/pull/2323), merged December 2022) so the problem with `RoleAssignment` went away.

> However, we decided that this question still needed to be considered, as it's likely to come up again in the future and we need to have a plan in place for how to handle it.

Reviewer: I don't know that it's actually that likely.

```suggestion
However, we decided that this question still needed to be considered, as it may come up again in the future and we need to have a plan in place for how to handle it.
```

Reviewer: Oh, you even allude to this below (it's not likely), but we wanna document what to do anyway.

Author: Done.

Fortunately, the `azure-rest-api-specs` is very tightly controlled and is used as the source of truth for code generation of client APIs across multiple languages (including Python, Java, C# and Go) so it's vanishingly unlikely for a resource version to be removed without warning. 

### Scenario A: Deletion of preview version

> The most likely scenario is that an old preview version of a service is removed. Preview versions are only guaranteed to be supported for 90 days after creation, though in practice they are retained much much longer.

Reviewer: minor: Repetition probably not required here.
```suggestion
The most likely scenario is that an old preview version of a service is removed. Preview versions are only guaranteed to be supported for 90 days after creation, though in practice they are retained much longer.
```

Author: Done.

If the new ASO release is not available until after the depredcation/deletion date, users will need to export/recreate their resources as a part of the upgrade process.

In either case, the removal of the old version from ASO will be a breaking change that must be documented on the breaking release, and should be documented on earlier releases if possible.

### Scenario: Deletion of GA version

The deletion of a GA version of a resource is much rarer event, and requires a much longer notice and deprecation period. 

ASO should be aware of this change well in advance, and should be able to support migration by including a later version of the resource in a new release. We should also document the upcoming deprecation so that users know they need to migrate.

### Scenario: Deletion of an entire resource

Even rarer, this can happen when a service is retired or replaced. ASO should be aware of this change well in advance. Where possible, we should provide a migration path to the new service, and document the upcoming deprecation so that users know they need to migrate.

## Decision

> Deletion of an upstream resource inevitably results in that resource being removed from ASO as we don't retain sufficient information to regenerate the resource. This is a breaking change.

Reviewer: Not only do we not retain sufficient information to regenerate the resource, more importantly the actual resource will not work so even if we could generate it, it would not be useful.

IMO better to focus on that as that's the salient point, and mention the inability to generate as a second aspect that is less critical (since it won't work even if generated).

Author: Good point, my focus was too narrow.
